>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we are coming to you
live from Gaiam studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
And since this is a
live, interactive show,
I encourage you to
communicate with us
on Facebook and Twitter.
Give us your comments.
Give us your questions.
We'll be asking them
throughout the show.
So let me ask you,
are you eating
enough fruits and
vegetables a day?
The recommended daily amount
of fruits and vegetables
is five servings a day.
Now, what is a serving?
Is a carrot a serving?
Is a glass of fruit juice
count as a juice serving?
The American Cancer
Society actually
recommends double that
amount of intake of food--
should be more than half of
your daily intake of food.
So-- that's fruits and
vegetables should be.
So why is that?
Why does the American
Cancer Society
recommend fruits and vegetables
should be more than half
of your daily intake of food?
Today, my guest is
Victoria Boutenko.
She is a raw
foodist, and she has
some of those answers for us.
She's provided so
much in her books,
"Green for Life," her
bestselling books,
and has been doing this for 25
years in the raw food movement.
Thank you for joining me today.
>>VICTORIA BOUTENKO:
My pleasure.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Well, we have-- there's
so much great information that
comes with your stories and what
you have to say about raw food
and why it makes so
much sense to you.
Tell me how you got
started in this,
because you weren't
always a raw foodist.
>>BOUTENKO: No.
About 19 years ago, we went
on raw food as a family.
What happened is when we came
to United States 25 years ago--
we immigrated from
the Soviet Union,
which was very hungry
country at that time--
we were so food deprived
that we went for the food.
And we thought that America is
the most healthiest countries
in the world and that it's
so scientifically measured
and proven.
And the wealthiest countries
should be the healthiest.
So I felt fine eating anything
in bright, colored packages.
So I didn't really limit myself.
And one year later, we
started to become sick.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BOUTENKO: And then in the
year of 1994-- 1993 and 1994-
we became so ill.
I developed arrhythmia,
which is irregular heartbeat.
The disease that took
my father's life.
And gained lots of weight.
My husband developed rheumatoid
arthritis and hyperthyroidism.
So his eyes were bulgy
and he started to shake
and became red faced.
And my daughter, she
developed asthma.
And my son developed diabetes.
And my grandmother died
from overdose of insulin,
so I was so afraid that
something will happen to him.
So my scare of that--
>>LISA: Your health crisis.
The whole family
being in crisis.
>>BOUTENKO: And my
oldest son was lucky.
He was living separately.
He didn't go on raw food.
He was not getting sick.
>>LISA: So do you directly
correlate all of the illnesses
to the food?
>>BOUTENKO: I do.
Yes.
Processed food.
Because I didn't realize
that processed food
is processed food, no matter
what wealthy country is it.
>>LISA: So the move that you
made was relatively overnight,
wasn't it?
You just--
>>BOUTENKO: No.
For awhile, I didn't know what.
First, I went to
the doctor, and they
said Sergie has
to go on insulin.
And I have very
good education, so I
went to the medical library and
I checked out medical-- a book
about diabetes, a
thick book, and I
saw-- I read on the
first page, there
is no known cure
and no known cause.
And I was thinking, so
what is that book then,
if there's no known
cure and cause?
But I read it anyways, and
I became even more scared
of insulin.
Then I found book by
Dr. Julian Whitaker,
and he said that in
order to reduce the blood
sugar in the blood,
to increase insulin,
we need to do aerobic exercise.
Running is the best.
And so the next day I bought
running shoes for my son
and for me, because I
realized nine-year-old
will not start
running on his own.
So we started running.
And his blood sugar
became better.
>>LISA: With exercise.
>>BOUTENKO: And
then Dr. Whitaker
also said to reduce or take
out any meat and dairy.
And dairy was
really a big thing.
When I removed
dairy from his diet,
his blood sugar
went even better.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: So I thought I could
pull time longer and experiment
more.
I was encouraged.
And then I met a lady
who was a raw foodist.
And she told me that raw
food could reverse diabetes.
And I didn't know, but I
decided to see what I could do.
So then, pretty fast--
January 21, 1994,
we became a raw food family.
I simply turned off
the pilot in the stove.
Kids went to school.
My husband went to work.
I just covered the stove
with a huge cutting board
and threw away everything
cooked and went
and bought some bananas
and wax-covered apples.
I didn't know about organic.
And whatever I knew to eat.
Didn't buy no greens.
I didn't know-- I
didn't like greens.
And we became raw fooders.
>>LISA: So, in a sense,
after you did your research,
it was an overnight
change for the family.
Was that a difficult--
>>BOUTENKO: That was overnight.
It was a cold tofurkey.
>>LISA: A cold tofurkey.
Was it shocking to your family?
>>BOUTENKO: It
was shocking, yes.
It was shocking for children.
They revolted.
Sergie said, I would rather
give myself insulin shots
the rest of my life than
take this crazy diet.
People will humiliate
me at school.
And he was revolting, and
Valya was also joining him.
But as long as
they became hungry,
and they came to the
kitchen, and I gave them
bananas and apples,
and they were
so that they
started eating them.
They didn't have choice.
I didn't give them choice.
So next morning,
surprisingly, we already
felt somewhat better.
It was crazy.
We felt totally crazy.
And I told them,
don't tell anybody.
Because I didn't know what
to expect from people.
>>LISA: I understand
that you even
got a visit from
the social services?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, but
they told other people.
Somehow it leaked out.
And the neighbor--
I don't even know
which neighbor-- called
on social services.
And we barely ever left
our children at home,
but somehow they-- I don't
know if they were waiting there
around the corner.
We went-- me and my husband
went to the next door office
to pick up something.
And as soon as we left, two
ladies walked into the house.
And as my children
told me, there
were two unhealthy
looking ladies,
smelled like cigarettes, and
because such kind of people
came and they were
talking in such kind
of different serious way,
Sergie felt intuitively
that he's in trouble.
And so he just lied to them.
So the lady said,
darling, tell me,
what did you have for dinner?
And he said, we just
came from McDonald's.
The first thing
came to his mind.
And they said, there was a
fake call from neighbors,
and they left.
>>LISA: Really?
So he told them that
he ate cooked food
so that he would
not get in trouble.
>>BOUTENKO: He,
somehow, intuitively
he felt that these ladies
didn't come with good news.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BOUTENKO: And he lied.
>>LISA: So why did
those people think
that raw food was so unhealthy?
>>BOUTENKO: I think
that because it's not
supported by government.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: And so we became--
I became so scared of that.
I didn't want my children
to be lost or taken from me.
I actually finished
the business,
closed the business I had.
I had several
businesses at that time.
And we started traveling.
For 2 1/2 years, we were
living out of a van,
homeless and unemployed, because
I didn't want to live in one
place more than 30 days.
I didn't want--
>>LISA: But you stayed
committed to the raw food diet?
>>BOUTENKO: We were staying
committed, maybe too long.
>>LISA: And were people--
were you feeling better?
Was your family getting better?
>>BOUTENKO: We felt-- in
the first several years,
we felt fantastic.
Absolutely fantastic.
Beautiful.
We ran 10,000K, in the
10K race in Boulder.
>>LISA: So you did heal
your family from this?
>>BOUTENKO: We
healed our family.
Our bodies healed us.
>>LISA: And now, you combine--
and what I love about Victoria
is that she makes this
very simple for us.
And introducing a smoothie, a
green smoothie or a green drink
to your diet is a
great way to start.
And I don't know if at the
time you were 100% raw,
but this is a good way
for maybe a beginner
to start with
something like this.
Why do you combine the
fruits and the vegetables
in your smoothies?
>>BOUTENKO: The green
smoothies came later.
We stayed on the raw food
diet 100% for too long.
I don't recommend it
to anybody anymore.
I say, begin with
green smoothies.
Don't change whatever
you eat, but add
one quart of green smoothie
every day to your diet.
>>LISA: Every day.
>>BOUTENKO: And I don't ever
combined fruits and vegetables.
I don't consider that
greens are vegetables.
They have different
content than,
like, say carrots or beets.
They don't have starch.
And so greens could be
combined with anything.
With any product.
>>LISA: The leafy greens.
As long as they're leafy greens.
>>BOUTENKO: I call
greens something
you can roll around the finger.
Not green Granny Smith
apples or cucumbers.
So the leafy greens could
be combined with anything,
because they have very
low amount of starch.
>>LISA: And they also
have a very, very high--
and they're very rich
in vitamins and--
>>BOUTENKO: Everything.
In all essential vitamins,
essential nutrients,
and proteins and everything.
>>LISA: There's protein that
you can find in vegetables?
>>BOUTENKO: Like, for
example, vegetables
have only up to 6%
to 7% of protein.
They're really low.
>>LISA: Fruits do?
>>BOUTENKO: Fruits
and root vegetables
have very little protein.
But the green vegetables have
a lot of protein, up to 40%.
That's why horses and
cows, they eat greens.
>>LISA: They get their protein--
>>BOUTENKO: Mustangs in the wild
nature eat 5 kilos of greens.
It will be 10 pounds
of greens per day.
>>LISA: Which green
leafy vegetable
has the most amount of protein?
>>BOUTENKO: According
to my research,
it's red leaf lettuce.
>>LISA: Red leaf lettuce.
>>BOUTENKO: But also I
remember that spinach also
is high in protein.
They're all about
39%, 40%, 41%, 42%.
>>LISA: And this
research you can find on?
>>BOUTENKO: On
nutritiondata.com, which
is a government
supported website.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So these smoothies are
absolutely beautiful.
We're going to be making
the smoothies a little bit
later in the show.
We'll have a live demonstration.
You'll see how easy it is to
be able to add this to your--
>>BOUTENKO: Easy,
most palatable,
practical, delicious
nourishment.
>>LISA: And fast.
It's amazing.
>>BOUTENKO: And most nutritious.
>>LISA: Take a look at
some of these smoothies.
They're absolutely beautiful,
what Victoria does.
She really makes food
as art, essentially.
They're just gorgeous.
This particular one
is layered with-- what
is that-- mango and then
kiwi and strawberry.
And there is, in each
one of these smoothies,
there's also green juices.
>>BOUTENKO: Green leaves.
>>LISA: Green leaves.
Yes.
A lot of those.
>>BOUTENKO: And I
added psyllium husk
to make them look
like a pudding.
To hold-- to be firm, so
that I could do layers.
>>LISA: Now in the-- when
you were combining the fruits
and the green leafy
vegetables, that
doesn't complicate the
digestive system at all?
>>BOUTENKO: It actually helps.
Because, for example,
sugar in the fruit.
It could be too much
for your system.
>>LISA: Alone.
>>BOUTENKO: But the insoluble
fiber and chlorophyll,
they both slow down
absorption of sugar.
And so that doesn't
give you any sugar rush.
My son was diagnosed
with juvenile diabetes
at the age of nine, but he eats
green smoothies all the time.
No problem.
In the last three
years, I had conducted
15 retreats-- green smoothie,
one week long retreats--
in different parts of
the world, and usually
have up to 70 people
at these retreats.
And everybody-- diabetics and
people with candida and people
with sugar intolerance,
people with hyperglycemia--
they consumed this
fruit smoothies
with greens no problem.
>>LISA: So the greens
actually balance out
the glycemic index of the fruit?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Yes.
And also because
sunlight performs
in our body as insulin,
so do the greens
because chlorophyll is nothing
but liquefied sunshine.
And so when diabetics consume
chlorophyll in any form,
it balances their blood sugar.
It works as insulin.
And there are different
levels of damage
to pancreas in different
diabetic conditions.
And some people
could reverse it,
and some people could just
reduce the amount of insulin
they take.
>>LISA: I see.
OK.
So one of our Facebook
questions coming in is saying,
do the green juices actually
help you reduce fatigue?
>>BOUTENKO: Green
smoothies on its own
might not reduce-- they might
reduce, but not eliminate.
For the fatigue,
you need to rest.
You need to sleep.
You need to--
>>LISA: Simply stated.
>>BOUTENKO: --let your
adrenal glands rest.
And also you need
to go to bed early.
Because adrenals only
rest from 11:00 to 1:00.
And if you don't sleep
from 11:00 to 1:00--
if you work at that
time-- then you
do accumulate adrenal fatigue.
>>LISA: Ah hah.
>>BOUTENKO: And so-- but the
green smoothies, of course,
they take care of your health.
They nourish you and detox you.
>>LISA: There's a difference
between green smoothies
and green juices.
>>BOUTENKO: There
is a difference.
>>LISA: And so you advocate
the green smoothie.
The blended ones.
>>BOUTENKO: For many reasons.
For many reasons.
However, I do
sometimes make juice.
On a hot summer day, I do.
I prefer smoothie because
it's very practical.
I've been juicing for
years before I figured out
the smoothies.
And it does take
commitment, because it
takes about an hour or more.
If I wanted to make juice
for the whole family,
it could take up to four hours.
>>LISA: Because you-- yes.
Absolutely.
>>BOUTENKO: And it's expensive.
>>LISA: And then you
lose all of the fiber.
>>BOUTENKO: And then you
throw away the fiber.
And then, when I've learned what
a magical sponge the fiber is--
it looks, under
microscope, like a sponge.
And it absorbs
toxins from your body
in your sewage
system-- in the colon.
Then why throw away fiber?
We don't consume enough fiber.
We're supposed to,
even according to USDA,
consume 30 grams
of fiber per day,
but average American
consumes 10 to 12.
That's not enough.
You cannot be healthy
if you don't detox.
>>LISA: Right.
If you don't have the
proper elimination system.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Well, let's
take a look at this clip
because it shows 15
smoothies in three minutes
and how easy it is to do.
Take a look.
You can visit rawfamily.com
to see all of those recipes--
all the 15 different recipes.
We're going to be doing some
more demonstrations later
on in the show.
So these smoothies,
and green juices
in general, and green
foods in general,
are meant to improve
people's health.
Overall there has been an
enormous body of evidence
around this.
Particularly, how does-- how
much do you have to cook food,
or at what temperature
do you start
losing that quality of health?
Do you start to turn the
enzymes into something
that is no longer healthy?
At what temperature?
>>BOUTENKO: Anything
that is hotter
than the human body could
take is-- that's cooking.
>>LISA: So over 98 degrees?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And when you prepare cooked
raw food-- for example,
dehydrated-- you have to go
by the region where it grows.
For example, if
it's a pineapple,
pineapple grows in hot places
such as Australia or equator.
So they could tolerate
100, 110 degrees.
And you can dehydrate
them at that.
Or if you take
tomato, it has to be
dehydrated at lower temperature.
Or if it's banana,
it could go higher.
So you can go with natural--
you can think about this.
Where does it come from?
And where it grows.
And also, if you
put me in hot water,
I won't be able to
teach the lecture.
I will be cooked.
So, it has to be you
go with the human body.
It could be, probably
could tolerate up to 100.
But then after that,
it's not functioning.
>>LISA: And there's
various different types
of smoothie recipes
that you've put together
for overall health.
We're going to talk about a few
later on in the show, about how
to improve the digestive system.
And there's one that
you put together
that's a liver
type of a cleanse.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
Liver is special.
The entire blood of human
body, every two minutes,
is filtered through the liver.
So when we're born,
our liver is clean.
It's like a filter.
You change your air
filter in the car
regularly, and the oil
filter, but we don't ever
cleanse the liver.
And after years of use, it's all
full of different cholesterol
and all kinds of plugs, and
liver ducts are plugged.
So this smoothie will make
liver-- activates liver.
Makes it work.
So it's liver cleanse.
And it involves usually
dandelion and milk thistle
and some ginger.
>>LISA: So, now,
the liver cleanses
I've heard of in
the past or I've
done in the past have
been olive oil and garlic.
And those are very,
very hard to get down.
>>BOUTENKO: They're
hard, and they
could be harsh on the body.
And I personally think they
could be violent on the body.
>>LISA: Yeah.
They are very harsh.
So this you recommend.
Now, your son--
>>BOUTENKO: You don't
even feel anything.
You just know that it
activates your liver.
You feel better afterwards.
>>LISA: So you
mentioned dandelion.
That's one of the
main ingredients.
Why, specifically, dandelion?
>>BOUTENKO: Dandelion
had antioxidants in it.
They're bitter.
It gives them bitter taste.
That is activating.
It's stimulating the liver.
>>LISA: And so, also,
there's dandelion.
There's milk thistle.
And what properties
does milk thistle
have that help the liver?
>>BOUTENKO: The same.
Antioxidants.
>>LISA: Antioxidants.
And there's endive.
>>BOUTENKO: Endive.
They're bitter.
Again, antioxidants.
>>LISA: I know your son is a
big fan of the wild edibles.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Me, too.
>>LISA: You, too, as well.
Of course.
He probably learned it from you.
I actually want to
mention, you have an app.
You have a mobile app
for green smoothies.
>>BOUTENKO: For green
smoothies and for wild edibles.
We have two apps.
>>LISA: That's so great.
So people, the wild--
the green smoothies app,
you basically can just look
up in the market various
vegetables--
>>BOUTENKO: It covers all green
smoothie-- all major greens
and fruits that are available
in most markets of the world.
>>LISA: Greens.
>>BOUTENKO: And greens.
And it tells what this
particular green or food
is good for.
Is it good for osteoporosis
or for liver cleanse
or for anything.
And also, it offers you
different recipes with them.
And it provides you with the
nutrition data completely.
How many calories.
How much iron.
How much of anything in there.
>>LISA: That is so
practical and so great.
>>BOUTENKO: Very,
very practical.
I use it myself.
If I go to the store, and I
know I have endive at home,
I just look.
What else can I do with it?
>>LISA: It's a whole education
right there for your family.
And your son also
created one for the--
>>BOUTENKO: The wild edible app.
Because wild edibles are
not just something exotic.
It's a regional food
that we came from.
For example, not
many people know
that Romaine is
cultivated dandelions.
>>LISA: Oh, it is?
I didn't know that.
>>BOUTENKO: It came
from dandelions.
And so going to wild is going
to-- going away from processed,
from hybridized.
Back to nature.
It's something really
we can count on.
Its nature.
It's where we belong.
>>LISA: True.
Well, there's a whole
demonstration in this clip
that we're going to show you
of her son, Sergie, making
a wild edible smoothie.
Take a look at this.
>>Purslane is one
of few plants that
are rich in omega 3 fatty acids.
It's high in vitamin A,
B6, vitamin C, minerals,
calcium, iron, magnesium,
phosphorus, potassium, copper,
and manganese.
Purslane-- as well
as lamb's quarters,
which is the next
slide-- are two
weeds the plague organic farms.
And it has become
customary in my family
to seek out organic farmers
who have a purslane and lamb's
quarters problem and
ask them if we might
be able to help them weed and
collect some of these weeds
for free so that we can
use them in smoothies.
You can also go onto
seedsofchange.com
and order wild edible seeds.
seedsofchange.com.
If you don't want any
guesswork, you actually
plant these seeds in your
garden and grow wild edibles.
This is what we often
do in our garden.
All right, so this
is lamb's quarters.
And lamb's quarters really
likes dry, arid areas.
It likes to grow in the sun.
So chances are, if you have
a vacant lot or a ditch
around your neighborhood
or just a field,
you can find lamb's
quarters there.
It grows pretty big.
And its identifying
characteristic
is this white dust that
you see on the leaves.
And that white dust
is pure protein.
I never wash it off,
because it's pure protein.
>>How high does it grow?
>>It goes everywhere
from here to here.
It has a very stocky stem.
Very fibrous.
It's kind of like wood almost.
I never really use
the stem because it's
a lot of insoluble fiber.
But it's got a very nice taste.
It kind of tastes
mild, like spinach.
Not too much of a
chlorophyll taste.
I just take the leaves,
and I throw them
straight into a blender.
And it helps my body.
I love the taste of it.
High in calcium, niacin, folate,
iron, magnesium, phosphorus,
vitamin A, C, K.
Great source of fiber.
How about this one?
Clover.
How many people can
recognize clover?
Awesome.
So clovers are edible.
Let's see if you can
help me identify them.
How many leaves?
Three.
Unless you're really
lucky, then there's four.
Did you know that
four leaf clovers
are more nutritious
than three leaf clovers?
>>No.
>>Nah.
>>25% more.
>>Yeah.
There's one extra leaf.
So clovers are blood purifiers.
They help to cleanse our blood
and fight cancer growths.
Any kind of cysts or tumors.
You can eat the stem, the
flower, and the leaves.
>>LISA: That is so interesting.
This is stuff that
I would never know.
And also, you need to be safe.
So having an app, where you
can walk around in nature
and look at those types
of things, is great.
Cautioning people, of course, to
be aware of various pesticides
and chemicals on the
edibles-- on the wild edibles.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
You have to be very
safe and cautious
and know what
you're looking for.
But it's OK.
There is danger in anything.
Walking on the street
could be dangerous.
So just don't do anything
stupid, and you'll be fine.
>>LISA: Well, now, what is
one of the most nutritious
wild edibles available?
Are you able to pinpoint?
>>BOUTENKO: It's
not such a thing.
We always go for variety.
Because all greens in the world
have minute amount of alkaloids
that accumulate in our body.
And so we need to
have a variety.
This is the way of plants
to prevent overeating
of some plant in extinction.
Because if that
will not be there,
then the deer will come
and eat the entire lilac
in your backyard.
>>LISA: Is that why--
>>BOUTENKO: They go
from one to another.
>>LISA: Is that why you mix
the smoothies with fruits?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
>>LISA: Does it balance
out the alkaloids?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
This is why I try to use as much
variety of greens as possible.
>>LISA: I see.
>>BOUTENKO: So if you just
stick with spinach and kale
for a month--
>>BOUTENKO: No, it's
not a good idea.
You'll begin to feel like
frostbites in your face
from too much alkaloids.
>>LISA: So variety is the key.
>>BOUTENKO: Variety.
At least seven per week.
>>LISA: OK.
Seven different--
>>BOUTENKO: Like
Mondays, parsley.
Tuesdays, kale.
Wednesdays, cilantro.
Thursday is spinach.
Friday is--
>>LISA: There's all
sorts of recipes
that we have for you as well.
>>BOUTENKO: --Romaine and so on.
>>LISA: Tina from Facebook
is asking about plantains.
Are plantains considered
a wild edible?
>>BOUTENKO: Well,
we're not talking
about the banana plantains.
We're talking about the greens.
There's a round leaf green
wild edible called plantain.
>>LISA: The big banana leaves?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
>>LISA: Different than that.
>>BOUTENKO: It's like a grass.
It's a wild green that grows--
>>LISA: I'm a city girl.
Sorry.
>>BOUTENKO: --in the backyard.
But you'll be surprised
how much it's available.
It grows everywhere
around the world.
And it has these threads.
If you try to pull it, it will
have this thread sticking out
of it.
>>LISA: I mean, as much as
I love and am in nature,
I don't recognize
what I'm looking
at on the ground
as being edible.
That's fascinating.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And I think they
grow in Colorado.
The fields of plantain,
where they take the psyllium
husk from-- they make the
psyllium husk from it.
The husk from plantain
plants is called psyllium.
And that's what used as a very
valuable fiber supplement.
>>LISA: And that's the
soluble fiber that we find.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: So in terms of other
leafy green vegetables,
what's a good, soluble fiber
in leafy green vegetables?
>>BOUTENKO: Well--
>>LISA: Leafy greens.
Sorry.
>>BOUTENKO: Leafy greens usually
source of insoluble fiber.
The soluble comes
from the fruit.
>>LISA: OK.
So that's why you
combine the two?
>>BOUTENKO: That's
why I combine.
And also for the flavor.
For the taste.
>>LISA: Do you ever
add protein powder?
Is there anything--
>>BOUTENKO: I personally don't.
And I don't recommend,
because if you
put too much of a good
stuff, it's too good.
It becomes overwhelming
for the body.
It slows down the
absorption of nutrients
that are already there.
>>LISA: So maybe they
should be done separately?
>>BOUTENKO: You could
do it separately,
but I don't see the need.
I don't feel the need for it.
>>LISA: What about
putting a hemp protein
powder into-- hemp seed?
>>BOUTENKO: Any-- well, you
can for additional omega 3
fatty acids if you're
deficient in them.
However, anything you
add to green smoothie
will slow down
absorption of nutrients.
If you want it to
be slowed down.
Do you?
>>LISA: So what the
green smoothie provide
is as many of the vitamins
and nutrients that you need.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
The greens have
so many vitamins.
For example, did you know that
the greens of carrots or greens
of beets have 190
times more Vitamin
A than the carrot itself?
And greens have 20 times
more vitamin C than lemon.
And greens have 2000 times
more vitamin K than anything
else you can find.
>>LISA: Wow.
That's amazing.
>>BOUTENKO: So greens are
really very rich source
of nutrition, essential
minerals, essential vitamins,
and protein.
>>LISA: When we come
back, Victoria's
going to demonstrate how to
make two green smoothies,
particularly for your
health if you feel
a cold coming on, and also
one of them for a tummy ache.
We'll be right back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
Welcome back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
And my guest,
Victoria Boutenko, is
going to take us
through how to restore
our health with green
soups and green smoothies.
I'm really excited.
Isn't this beautiful?
It's just gorgeous.
The colors.
The health, vitality, just comes
up out of the colander here.
It's all gorgeous food.
You get to work with this
all the time, don't you?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, I do.
Every day.
In my office.
In my home.
In my car.
Everywhere.
>>LISA: It's nothing new to you.
It's just really-- I just
want-- I mean, look at that.
Isn't that beautiful?
Look at the colors
that just come
from right out of
that red chard, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Red chard, yes.
>>LISA: All right.
So what we're
doing here is we're
going to make an Oregano
Tummy Soother Soup.
And this is something that if
you have any digestive issues--
digestive aids are one
of the biggest selling
things in this country.
>>BOUTENKO: And even if you
don't have digestive problems,
it's delicious and nutritious.
>>LISA: And you do soups a lot.
>>BOUTENKO: You know, Lisa, I
have soup every day for lunch.
>>LISA: You do?
>>BOUTENKO: Green smoothie soup.
Yes.
And it's savory.
>>LISA: And is it hot?
Or is it--
>>BOUTENKO: I like it
hot most of the times.
Or spicy.
Spiced with some herbs.
And I would like to
show you this one today.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: OK.
This is a Vitamix blender.
That's my favorite.
I have three of them.
One in the car, one in
the office, one in--
>>LISA: In the car?
>>BOUTENKO: In the car.
If I travel by car, I
have it in my-- yeah.
>>LISA: Does it plug
into the lighter?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
But I did have a couple of
times, make it at rest areas
next to the--
>>LISA: Perfect.
>>BOUTENKO: --restrooms.
I would just make
my green things.
>>LISA: That-- I believe you.
No, that's a great idea.
It is actually a
great-- it's a great way
to make it convenient.
And a to-go Vitamix.
I've not heard of that before.
There's lots of different
things that you can use.
>>BOUTENKO: And I have
small, portable blenders,
like Silver Bullet and Tribest
that I take overseas when I go.
I just don't travel
without blender.
>>LISA: That is actually
a very good tip.
To travel with a Silver
Bullet is a great idea.
It's a type of a blender.
There's lots of different
ones that are available.
They've become very
available these days.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
And when I came here
to Denver for two days,
I froze two quarts of green
smoothie night before,
and I checked them
in with the luggage.
And in the morning, I
had my green smoothie.
>>LISA: You checked it in?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, because
in the air, it's cold.
So they're thawed.
When I came back to
land, they thawed.
>>LISA: Perfect.
>>BOUTENKO: And I had
my fresh green smoothie.
>>LISA: Oh my gosh,
that's what you
had this morning at the hotel.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Yesterday and today.
>>LISA: That's great.
That is great to know.
So you make it--
I mean, I love how
you make everything so
practical and so easy.
Because this would be something
that most people would
think, oh, god, I can't do this.
It's too involved.
I need to follow
a specific recipe.
You say you rarely
ever follow recipes.
>>BOUTENKO: I don't.
And it's been seven
years since I've
been doing green
smoothies every day,
except maybe two or three days.
>>LISA: Seven years.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: That's great.
All right.
So let's see.
What's in this that
helps our tummies?
>>BOUTENKO: Oregano.
>>LISA: Oregano.
>>BOUTENKO: And Rosemary.
And dandelion is the
king of everything.
>>LISA: King of everything.
And why?
>>BOUTENKO: Dandelions
are very nutritious.
They are richest in calcium
in the world, dandelions.
And also, they have
lots of micronutrients
that are healing, even
for things like diabetes.
Have you ever tried to pull
a dandelion on your lawn?
>>LISA: Yes.
They have that little--
>>BOUTENKO: Is it possible?
>>LISA: No.
They're very
strong, aren't they?
>>BOUTENKO: They
have long roots.
And if you don't
water your grass,
the grass will go
yellow, but dandelions
will stay brown-- I
mean, will stay green.
>>LISA: Will stay green.
Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: Because they
have very long roots.
And because they
have long roots,
they have all these
nutrients in them.
>>LISA: Now, they have the
little white sap inside of them
usually, don't they?
>>BOUTENKO: So
that's just juice.
>>LISA: Is it juice?
Are there certain nutrients
that are contained
in the white sappy
part of the dandelion?
>>BOUTENKO: It's probably.
We won't ever know
everything about nutrition.
We keep learning more and more.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: New nutrients.
I don't actually use the stems.
I only use the flowers.
>>LISA: The flowers.
>>BOUTENKO: That are going
to be thrown in there.
But I always want
to start with water,
so we see how much water we put.
Usually about two cups.
So this much.
And then I want to put greens.
And today I'm going
to use dandelions.
It's one of my favorite.
And I'm going to just cut.
These are dandelions
from your backyard.
>>LISA: The garden.
>>BOUTENKO: Lisa.
Yes.
And so I just take the green
part and throw it in there.
And this we can
discard into compost.
And also I'm going to
take most of these flowers
and I leave some for decoration.
>>LISA: So putting the
flowers right in there.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Yes.
Flowers smell good.
>>LISA: They do?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
This we discard.
And then oregano.
And I don't like
to put the stems,
because they are
just mostly wood.
So I just put this.
>>LISA: So it doesn't-- the stem
itself is a little too fiberous
for the Vitamix?
>>BOUTENKO: Exactly.
>>LISA: Yeah, they
are pretty tough.
So taking that off.
And then, if you
were to put it in,
does it add or take
away any type of fiber
that you would need?
>>BOUTENKO: It will take
fiber, but it will be chewy.
You'll be finding it
in between your teeth.
It's not very nice.
And I don't want to put too much
of it, because when we blend,
the flavor will be brought up.
>>LISA: Now, what properties
in the oregano help the tummy?
>>BOUTENKO: Oregano has
certain antioxidants
that destroy all
pathogenic bacteria.
It's very-- it's
good against candida.
>>LISA: I've heard
that it's very, very
good for a cold as well.
I've seen different types
of oregano for a cold.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
It's a medicinal herb.
>>LISA: And an antifungal?
Does it have antifungal
properties as well?
>>BOUTENKO: Absolutely.
And the rosemary is also very
similar, but has different.
It has some ether, some oils
that are very antifungal.
>>LISA: Antifungal and
antibacterial as well.
It smells so good in here.
Oh, god, that smells great.
>>BOUTENKO: Now, I'm going
to show you how to use--
>>LISA: Avocado?
>>BOUTENKO: --avocado pit here.
I don't do it very often,
because the avocado pit is
a little bit bitter and I
kind of get tired of it.
But it does have potassium.
And also it has a good source
of soluble fiber in it.
So I'll show you how to blend
avocado pit in the blender.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>BOUTENKO: You can only do
it in a high speed blender.
If you have a just simple
blender, cheap blender,
it wouldn't work.
And in order to get it in
half-- I want to put only half
of the pit.
I have to do it straight
from the beginning.
I cannot open it first, and
then try to cut the pit.
>>LISA: You're
going to cut right--
>>BOUTENKO: I'll cut myself.
>>LISA: --through the pit here.
>>BOUTENKO: So I
just do it together
with this, because
it's very soft.
I got it.
>>LISA: Oh, that's beautiful.
Right.
>>BOUTENKO: OK.
>>LISA: So that's the
inside of an avocado pit.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
So we're going to
put it in here.
I'm going to scoop the
avocado in there, too.
>>LISA: OK.
Now the avocado has
an amazing amount
of essential fatty acids.
It has protein.
It's actually a
complete food, isn't it?
>>BOUTENKO: Avocado
is very good.
It does even have vitamin
K and chlorophyll in it.
And it has vitamin E, and it
has both omega 3 and omega 6.
Has more omega 6s, but
in a ratio like 1:6.
There's six times more
omega 6s than omega 3s.
But it's natural for
humans, so it's OK.
>>LISA: And I've heard that
this is a complete food.
This is a super food.
It has all the elements,
in terms of protein,
essential fatty acids, vitamins,
in one complete food, right?
>>BOUTENKO: I think it
depends on the person.
I don't believe
necessarily that it
is complete food for everybody.
For some people, maybe.
>>LISA: OK.
But it contains
more elements than--
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Definitely.
>>LISA: --a regular--
>>BOUTENKO: It's a
very valuable food.
A very valuable,
nutritious food.
And I personally consume
avocados regularly.
>>LISA: You do?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: About how many
avocados a day do you eat?
>>BOUTENKO: One.
>>LISA: One avocado a day.
Not more?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
I don't eat more.
>>LISA: Because?
>>BOUTENKO: It's just enough.
>>LISA: It's enough.
>>BOUTENKO: I used to be able
to eat five avocados a day
sometime ago, maybe
five years ago.
>>LISA: Well, I know
that you can also
use them for your face.
There's a lot of different
uses that you could--
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Yes.
And contrary to popular belief,
dogs could eat avocados.
And even-- you find lots of
sources online that dogs cannot
eat avocados.
I don't agree with it.
I don't think it's true.
I've seen wild dogs and
coyotes and other kinds
of dogs and foxes each avocados.
Especially in San Diego,
where avocados grow plentiful,
you'll find coyotes
right in avocados.
And I had a dog and my friend
had a dog and my son had a dog,
and all of these dogs just
loved avocados and their fur
gets good.
And there's now even a
company called AvoDerm.
>>LISA: Right.
I use that for our cats.
>>BOUTENKO: And so
this is a confusion
brought by some
erroneous research.
So anyways--
>>LISA: All right.
So I mean, if the dog will
eat the avocado, though.
Sometimes they don't
like that consistency.
But it depends on the region.
>>BOUTENKO: So if it wouldn't
have rosemary and oregano,
that would be also
a pet smoothie.
>>LISA: Oh, a pet smoothie.
OK.
So you make green smoothies
for your pets all the time?
>>BOUTENKO: All the time.
>>LISA: Rather than dog food?
>>BOUTENKO: I don't ever
give dog food for my dog.
>>LISA: I can't
imagine that you would.
>>BOUTENKO: So we just
put the whole thing.
We'll just leave a little
piece for decoration for later.
>>LISA: So oregano.
We have rosemary,
avocado, cucumber.
>>BOUTENKO: It's
very simple, yes.
And then we want to
use lemon, but we
want to make sure that
the seeds are out.
Because if I leave the
seeds, they're edible,
but they will make it bitter.
Very bitter.
>>LISA: So specifically
leaving the seeds out.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Now-- wow,
we got sprayed.
In terms of the-- when you
said that the avocado pit has
the soluble fiber in it, are
you not getting enough fiber
from the vegetables and
the leaves themselves?
What's the difference?
>>BOUTENKO: The
indigenous people
get up to 150 grams of fiber,
according to my research,
and we're supposed to get
30 grams of fiber per day,
according to USDA.
But most people get, on average,
statistically, 10 to 12.
And many people have 3.
>>LISA: Which would explain
a lot of colon disease.
>>BOUTENKO: And without
fiber, we cannot really detox.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: Because fiber
takes all the toxins out.
>>LISA: So it cleanses the body.
And it also eliminates, yes, as
you said, a lot of the toxins.
>>BOUTENKO: So-- and lots
of food have zero fiber.
For example, all animal
products have zero fiber.
All white flour has zero fiber.
The white bread has zero fiber.
And so actually, the source of
fiber is fruits and vegetables.
And if you feel that you
don't have enough fiber, why
don't you just,
once in a while, put
half of avocado pit in your
smoothie, in your soup,
and enjoy more fiber.
>>LISA: That's a great idea.
I didn't know, actually,
that you could blend them.
But you have to have
a high-speed blender.
Is there various speeds
within a Vitamix?
So there's a low speed
and a high speed?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
Low and high.
Usually I use just two.
I don't very often
use the variable speed
except for specific recipes.
>>LISA: OK.
So we're going to
make some noise.
>>BOUTENKO: So you
close your ears.
>>LISA: So this is the soup.
And the friction itself
makes it a little bit warmer.
>>BOUTENKO: Warmer.
Yeah.
It's a piece of cucumber
I see stuck here,
so I'm just going to stop and
put it on high and start again.
>>LISA: Oh, that
looks so beautiful.
All right.
Here we go.
And for how long?
For how long do
you blend it for?
>>BOUTENKO: Usually I
blend it for 30 seconds.
Because I have
avocado pit there,
I wanted to make sure
it goes a little longer.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: So we're going to--
>>LISA: Oh, this is great!
>>BOUTENKO: --have this.
>>LISA: We get to try this.
You have to try this at home.
>>BOUTENKO: It is
very delicious soup.
And the key ingredients
are avocado and lemon juice
and some spice.
>>LISA: And it took us
under-- around 10 minutes
to make something like this.
>>BOUTENKO: And we have
some for cameraman, too.
>>LISA: Everyone in the studio
get to eat when we do this.
This is great.
And then you use this for
the-- oh, how beautiful.
That is one of the things
I love about fresh,
green foods is that
you can make them
so beautiful in
just a few minutes
and bring out all the health
and vitality and the vitamins
just by the presentation.
>>BOUTENKO: It's
not really a soup
until you put something
to float in it.
So I like to put some
additional ingredients, whatever
I have on hand.
Could be grated
carrots or beets.
>>LISA: Is that for the texture?
>>BOUTENKO: For the texture.
So you have something to crunch.
And I like something
bright, because I eat also
by the color.
>>LISA: Why do you do that?
>>BOUTENKO: Because
to make it pretty.
>>LISA: To make
it pretty, but do
they have different nutrients?
>>BOUTENKO: Of course it does.
>>LISA: Per color?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
It's rich in sodium.
And we all lack natural sodium.
And table salt doesn't
provide natural sodium.
>>LISA: No.
Absolutely.
Yeah, there is definitely
a need for that.
Now, do you ever
use salts or pepper?
>>BOUTENKO: I don't
have salt in my house.
I don't believe any
salt is good for us.
>>LISA: So sea salt, Himalayan
salt, rock salt, nothing?
>>BOUTENKO: I know some
people use salt, but I don't.
>>LISA: OK.
And no need for it, because
it comes from the vegetables?
>>BOUTENKO: I think so.
I agree.
Lisa, you are right.
>>LISA: That is gorgeous.
Can you see this?
So beautiful.
Now I want to eat it.
OK.
I do have to try this,
because it is-- mmm.
That is amazing.
It's so good.
>>BOUTENKO: It's creamy.
It's tasty.
>>LISA: But it tastes so fresh.
It really tastes so fresh.
>>BOUTENKO: And it's
filling and satisfying.
>>LISA: The oregano--
you can really
taste the oregano and the
rosemary specifically,
but in with the cucumber,
it softens the taste.
And it makes it like something
you could pretty much drink.
You could probably
drink it as well.
All right.
When we come back, we're
going to take a look
at making something
else that's good in case
you happen to get a cold.
We're going to
make a Cold Buster
smoothie when we come back.
So if you happen to
be feeling like you're
catching a cold, if
you're under the weather,
if you've got
symptoms of a cold,
why reach for something that's
over-the-counter medication
when you can get it from
nature as nature intended it?
So we have put together--
or, actually, Victoria
has put together--
an amazing recipe
for you called a
Spinach Cold Buster.
So tell us what's in it.
Of course, you've got
the beautiful spinach.
What properties in spinach help
with the symptoms of a cold?
>>BOUTENKO: Spinach is high
in chlorophyll, in vitamin K,
and it's alkalizing.
And it's a green you can
find at any store anywhere.
And it's mellow in taste,
and it's rich in calcium,
and it's just super rich.
It's rich even in protein.
>>LISA: Now,
chlorophyll is-- all
of these are high
in chlorophyll.
What is the benefit of
chlorophyll in the body?
>>BOUTENKO: Chlorophyll
is liquefied sunshine.
And sunshine, we always need.
There's never too much
light coming out of us.
So when we ingest
liquid sunshine
in the form of chlorophyll,
we emanate light.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
Emanate light.
Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: And the
garlic is really
detoxing and
antiviral, antifungus.
And why don't you
prepare me 12 cloves?
And don't peel them, because
we have a high speed blender,
so we can put them
with the peel.
>>LISA: You put
the peels right--
>>BOUTENKO: Just separate 12.
Yes.
>>LISA: You put the
peels right in the-- OK.
>>BOUTENKO: For the recipe.
>>LISA: All right.
Good to know.
>>BOUTENKO: And I'm also going
to add both cayenne pepper
and jalapeno, because both
peppers, they increase
circulation of blood and
lymph and they detox.
They help with the lymphatic
drainage in the body.
>>LISA: So the cayenne
is great for circulation.
And the jalapeno, they
have the same properties?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes,
which is excellent
if you get in touch
with anybody who
has fever, flu,
that's really helpful.
>>LISA: This is
great for teachers.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
I'm going to put the whole
entire lemon in there
for vitamin C.
>>LISA: The rind and everything?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
The juice of one lemon.
>>LISA: The juice of a lemon.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: So I'm just
going to start with that.
>>LISA: OK.
And then the cucumber
itself is, you said--
>>BOUTENKO: It's one of the
most alkalizing vegetables that
exist in the world, cucumber.
Cucumber-- actually lemon
also is very alkalizing,
which is very good.
So I'm going to
take the seeds out.
They're edible,
but they will be so
bitter nobody will
be able to enjoy it.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: So we want
to take the seeds out.
So if you use a little juicer,
then it will eliminate that.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
And now--
>>BOUTENKO: Now I'll just
squeeze it in the blender.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And then we'll
throw garlic in there.
All the cloves.
>>LISA: So you take all
of the cloves of garlic.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Put them in the
blender with the peel.
>>LISA: With the peel.
Now, the peel adds what?
What does the peel add?
>>BOUTENKO: It adds
insoluble fiber.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: There's
soluble and insoluble.
Soluble is like banana.
It's like gel.
It helps to form the
stool and helps eliminate.
Insoluble fiber helps
to grab some toxins
in the toxic waste
in our intestines.
>>LISA: OK.
Now this, of course, is
also great for allergies.
For seasonal allergies
as well as cold and flu?
>>BOUTENKO: What, garlic?
>>LISA: The whole entire--
yeah, garlic and the smoothie.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Of course, because it
increases elimination.
It speeds up your metabolism.
>>LISA: So everything
here, basically,
works as a detoxifier, builds
back up the immune system,
and increases circulation.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
So that's the idea that
you want behind it.
Now, you can--
>>BOUTENKO: I want to blend
it in a small amount of water
first, because I really
want to make sure
that all of this garlic
cloves are blended well,
including their peels.
>>LISA: So we'll do this first.
Go ahead.
>>BOUTENKO: Let's
make some noise.
>>LISA: All right.
>>BOUTENKO: That's enough.
>>LISA: That looks like milk.
>>BOUTENKO: About 10 seconds.
>>LISA: I would not mistake
it for milk, though.
I have to smell it.
Mmm, yeah.
>>BOUTENKO: Smells like health.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: And then
we'll add some more water.
>>LISA: So why did you do
it in stages like that?
>>BOUTENKO: Because I wanted to
have more friction in a smaller
amount of water to really
blend well the garlic.
>>LISA: Break up the garlic.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And I've
heard-- once I was traveling
in Siberia, and one shaman
told me that sometimes
in the winter, they just eat
the whole bulb of garlic as--
>>LISA: Like an apple?
>>BOUTENKO: --against parasites.
Like an apple, yeah.
They'll just peel it, of course,
and they'll just eat it alone.
>>LISA: For anti-- its
antiparasite quality?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's great.
Antiparasites,
antifungal, antibacterial.
Garlic is an amazing--
>>BOUTENKO: And some people
say we shouldn't eat no spices.
No garlic and no onions.
And I read this in
Ayurvedic teachings,
and I was following for
several years, not eating.
But then I read in
research of Jane Goodall
about chimpanzees,
that sometimes
in the wilderness,
Lisa, they would--
the students would follow
herd of chimpanzees,
the family of chimpanzees, and
they would pick up the stool
and pick up the
samples of their food.
And they noticed that whenever
they developed parasites
in the stool, they begin to
eat wild garlic and wild onion
and spicy leaves
and spicy fruits.
So that gave me an
idea that it's totally,
completely is intuitive.
So if I crave garlic
or, say, jalapeno,
or hot foods or chives,
I would go for it.
But then suddenly I would
stop, and I don't want it.
>>LISA: Because your
body is telling you
it needs to get
rid of parasites.
And then you--
>>BOUTENKO: Who knows.
Parasites, maybe something else.
We don't know everything
about our body.
We don't even know
what the body is.
>>LISA: Well, the body has an
amazing, innate intelligence
to heal itself.
>>BOUTENKO: Because how old are
you, and how old is your body?
Your body is thousands
of years old of wisdom.
>>LISA: That is true.
>>BOUTENKO: So I trust--
I choose to trust my body.
So let's put the
rest of ingredients.
And we don't even have
to mince that, actually.
>>LISA: The jalapeno?
>>BOUTENKO: I'm just going to--
>>LISA: Put the
whole thing in there?
>>BOUTENKO: The
whole thing in, yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BOUTENKO: And did
we put already--
>>LISA: This'll get
the blood moving.
Absolutely.
All right.
>>BOUTENKO: And seeds
of the jalapeno also.
>>LISA: And now, this will
help take some of the fire
out, right?
The cucumber will.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
You can just chop it coarsely.
>>LISA: Now, it doesn't
matter how thick
you cut the cucumber, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, if you
have a good blender.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
And so now--
>>BOUTENKO: The
whole thing goes in,
because we don't need to
leave any for decoration now.
So just whole thing goes in.
>>LISA: The whole cucumber.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: I would think
you need to balance that
out a little bit.
>>BOUTENKO: And we shouldn't
forget the cayenne pepper.
>>LISA: More spice.
Get that circulation moving.
So now-- and the cayenne,
of course, again,
is good for the lymph
nodes, for circulation.
>>BOUTENKO: For detox and
antiviral, antiparasite.
>>LISA: Just put
everything in there.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And then just
stuff it with the--
>>LISA: Got to
remember our spinach.
>>BOUTENKO: --spinach.
>>LISA: And our avocado.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And this time, we're not
going to use the pit.
So we're just going to
use one whole avocado,
but without the pit.
>>LISA: Can I?
>>BOUTENKO: You can, sure.
>>LISA: Although you are the
master chef, and I am learning.
OK
>>BOUTENKO: OK.
You do this part,
I do this part.
>>LISA: All right.
I actually do know that you have
a way of taking this pit out
of here, I saw it demonstrated--
>>BOUTENKO: So just
go ahead and try it.
>>LISA: --by your daughter.
If I do this right--
just cut it like this?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
And just twist it.
>>LISA: Oh, you twist it.
Beautiful.
I did it.
>>BOUTENKO: So you
learn by doing.
>>LISA: I watched that
on one of your videos.
>>BOUTENKO: Oh, good.
>>LISA: Great.
So now, why do you
use the avocado?
>>BOUTENKO: Avocado
has soluble fiber,
so that will help to
keep the smoothie silky.
And it will prevent
it from separation.
If I don't use avocado, then
it will separate in one minute.
It will be foam on top and
lots of liquid underneath.
>>LISA: So avocado is
essentially a fruit, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And it has soluble fiber in
it, so that will make sure that
it'll be-- consistency will
be thorough throughout the--
>>LISA: So we are actually
adding a fruit to this smoothie
as well.
>>BOUTENKO: And also, it
will mellow the spice in.
The spice will still
go in the body,
but it will be easier to
consume because of avocado.
It makes it easier.
>>LISA: Now, this much spice
wouldn't hurt the tummy at all?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
>>LISA: No?
You're looking at me
like it's a foreign--
my tummy is very
sensitive to spice.
>>BOUTENKO: The
human body is really
made to be consuming
different things.
And when we're looking at
that spice and smelling it,
our body's capable of creating
a preventative layer of mucus
that will not let it be hurt.
>>LISA: Just by smelling it?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>BOUTENKO: And then
this is the best lotion.
>>LISA: Great.
>>BOUTENKO: The avocado.
>>LISA: Don't wash
it off of your hands.
>>LISA: Don't ever.
Don't waste it.
>>LISA: That's a great idea.
>>BOUTENKO: Save
money on lotions.
>>LISA: Put it in your hair.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Well, and then
you have to go take a shower.
>>LISA: All right.
This is going to be great.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And see,
some of the greens
are actually getting
into the lid,
so I'll just do a little
bit and then go again.
>>LISA: Back to our
power tool segment here.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
And now I can push it down.
OK.
So 30 seconds.
>>LISA: Shouldn't
take the lid off.
It'll go everywhere.
I'm gonna turn it.
You know what you're doing.
We've made enough
for you at home,
so this'll work out perfectly.
That's amazing.
So you had a different
technique that you used there,
with the blender.
You turn it off, and then
you can turn it back on.
You don't actually need to use
anything-- a spoon or anything.
>>BOUTENKO: Sometimes
I use a tamper
when I prefer to have less
liquid in it-- in the blender.
If I make puddings without
water, then I use this.
Or if something's stuck.
But this time, I just turn it
off and turn it on quickly.
>>LISA: And now the water, it
doesn't dilute the enzymes,
does it?
>>BOUTENKO: Smell it.
>>LISA: Ooh, you know what?
That-- you can't really
smell the garlic at all.
You can smell
mostly the cucumber.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, and the lemon.
>>LISA: And the lemon.
Absolutely.
Isn't that amazing.
I want you all to
try this at home,
because this is-- even
if you don't have a cold,
it's a great detoxifier.
It's great for circulation.
Probably amazing for energy,
because both of those things
are going to, of course,
build your energy.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And you could also
add an apple to that
to make it more palatable
if you want, as a variety.
>>LISA: Cheers.
>>BOUTENKO: Cheers.
>>LISA: Cheers to you at home.
Definitely try these
green smoothies at home.
As you can see, it takes
us about 10 minutes,
or under 10 minutes,
to make these.
And I have to taste this.
Mmm.
That actually tastes
like a soup as well.
>>BOUTENKO: It is
actually very tasty.
>>LISA: It's really good.
Do you know what it tastes like?
Guacamole.
Guacamole in a glass.
Ooh, that's really, really good.
>>BOUTENKO: It's a
liquid guacamole.
>>LISA: Liquid guacamole.
To your health.
And if you'd like to watch
my interview with Victoria
Boutenko or share it
with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com for more
thought provoking interviews,
inspirational
films, so much more.
Go to gaiamtv.com
today and sign up
for your free trial membership.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
Cheers.
>>BOUTENKO: Greens.
>>LISA: Greens.
Thank you so much.
>>BOUTENKO: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Oh, this is great.
Mmm.